# Redshift Cloud DW

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Cloud DW
Amazon Redshift is a data warehouse product which forms part of the larger cloud-computing platform Amazon Web Services.

Redshift uses parallel-processing and compression to decrease command execution time. This allows Redshift to perform operations on billions of rows at once. This also makes Redshift useful for storing and analyzing large quantities of data from logs or live feeds through a source such as Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose.

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
data/song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
data/song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Data Modeling

### Facts

**f_songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page ```NextSong```

_songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

### Dimensions

**d_users** - users in the app

_user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_

**d_songs** - songs in music database

_song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_

**d_artists** - artists in music database

_artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude_

**d_time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

_start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_


## ETL
### How to run process
1. Start the AWS Redshift Cluster
- Configure the IAM role to AmazonS3ReadOnlyAccess.
- We recommend to use dc2.large cluster with 4 nodes. Note that each node a cost of USD 0.25/h (on-demand option) per cluster

2. Open a terminal

3. Run 'create_tables.py'
- This will create the tables in the data warehouse

4. Run 'etl.py'
- This will run the ETL process

### Project Structure
- create_tables.py - Drop old tables (if exist) ad re-create new tables
- etl.py - Executes the queries that extract JSON data from the S3 bucket and ingest them to Redshift
- sql_queries.py - Contains variables with SQL statement in String formats, partitioned by CREATE, DROP, COPY and INSERT statements
- dhw.cfg - Configuration file that contains info about Redshift, IAM and S3
